databases/mariadb/migration-n-upgrade/mariadb_galera_ugrade_fm_10_4_to_10_6.md, before:

# Upgrading MariaDB (Galera) from 10.4 to 10.6
Instructions on how to upgrade MariaDB Galera setup.

#### References

#### Highlevel Steps
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1GaqwR1rFb1jJN_7d7wJ30WPc0MV33um8F2naIWYwuug/edit

### NOTE: Replace anything in curly brackets with relevant values

## Step 0 : Deploy software
### Step 0-1 : Deploy CC2 (beyond the scope of this document)
### Step 0-2 : Deploy MariaDB galera software
Download MariaDB 10.6 packages from https://dlm.mariadb.com/browse/mariadb_server/10.6.21/yum/rhel/9Server/x86_64/rpms/

Download MariaDB 10.4 packages from https://dlm.mariadb.com/browse/mariadb_server/10.4.34/yum/rhel/8Server/x86_64/rpms/

#### MariaDB 10.6 and Galera 4
All the D?_C?_N hosts need to have the following packages on them

On D?_C?_N hosts and INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
```

#### MariaDB 10.4 and Galera 4
The INTERM_HOST needs to have the following additional packages on it

On INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_4_packages
ls -l 
galera-4-26.4.18-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
```

## Step 1 : Create Intermediate (MariaDB 10.4) Replica (single node galera)
### Step 1-1 : Create Intermediate (MariaDB 10.4) Replica through CC2
#### Install MariaDB and Galera packages (manual)
Install the database packages manually on the respective hosts:

On INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_4_packages
dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

#### Deploying through ClusterControl (CC2)
![img.png](img.png)


### Step 1-2 : Create Binary backup of Prod
Select one of the nodes in the Prod galera cluster and SSH to it.

On PROD_BACKUP_HOST:
```
ssh {PROD_BACKUP_HOST}

# NOTE: change the location of the backup and make sure mysql user has privs to write to the location.
# NOTE: you may also have to pass in "--user=value --password=value" options...
sudo su - mysql
mkdir -p {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}
ulimit -n 256000 && LC_ALL=C mariadb-backup --defaults-file=/etc/my.cnf \
    --backup --galera-info --slave-info --parallel=1 --stream=xbstream | \
    gzip -6 - > {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz  2>&1
exit
sudo su -
mv {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
exit
sudo chown {SHELL_USER:SHELL_USER} /tmp/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz
```
NOTE: Please record the binlog file, position and GTID. It will be a line such as the following
```
[e.g.] MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000013', position '379', GTID of the last change '87000-87000-478'
```

### Step 1-3 : Transfer Binary backup of Prod to Intermediate
On INTERM_HOST:
```
# Example
scp {SHELL_USER}@{PROD_BACKUP_HOST}:/tmp/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
```

### Step 1-4 : Restore Binary backup of Prod on Intermediate
#### Stop the node (i.e., the single node galera cluster) from CC2
This will stop the MariaDB server on the single node galera. Verify that it is indeed stopped by:
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```
#### Restore backup
Now you are ready start restore. Unzip and extract the backup first

On INTERM_HOST:
```
# Example
cd /tmp
ls -al
-rw-rw-r--.  1 cloud-user cloud-user 70519388 Mar 13 18:51 backup-full-1.xbstream.gz

gunzip backup-full-1.xbstream.gz 
mkdir prod-backup
cd prod-backup
mbstream -x < ../backup-full-1.xbstream
ls -l
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user     49152 Mar 13 16:11 aria_log.00000001
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        52 Mar 13 16:11 aria_log_control
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       326 Mar 13 16:11 backup-my.cnf
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       379 Mar 13 16:11 binlog.000010
-rw-rw-r--. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       318 Mar 13 15:52 cmon_backup.log
-rw-------. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      3041 Mar 13 15:52 cmon_backup.metadata
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 employees
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       972 Mar 13 16:11 ib_buffer_pool
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      2560 Mar 13 16:11 ib_logfile0
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 104857600 Mar 13 16:11 ibdata1
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        84 Mar 13 16:11 menagerie
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 mysql
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 nation
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        20 Mar 13 16:11 performance_schema
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 sakila
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user       144 Mar 13 16:11 world
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        34 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_binlog_info
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       105 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_checkpoints
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        41 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_galera_info
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       556 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_info
```
##### Prepare the backup
```
sudo chown -R mysql:mysql /tmp/prod-backup
sudo su - mysql
mariabackup --prepare --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```
##### Move back the backup to datair of MariaDB
```
sudo su - mysql
cd /var/lib
/bin/rm -rf ./mysql/*

ls -l ./mysql
# should be empty

mariabackup --move-back --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```
#### Start the node from CC2 (use bootstrap cluster option)
NOTE: do **NOT** select the "**initial start**" option

#### Grant privileges to CC2 to monitor the single node galera 
You will need the following:
* CC2's hostname
* CC2's ipv4 address
* Password used by CC2 to monitor the single node cluster. This can be obtained from the CC2 host's /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf file (search for "mysql_password" attribute)
 

![img_1.png](img_1.png)

On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
exit
exit
```

### Step 1-5 : Setup Intermediate as Slave of Prod (and allow to sync)
#### Create and Grant privileges for the replication user on the Prod cluster
You will need the following:
* Intermediate's hostname
* Intermediate's ipv4 address
* A password to use for auth. Just generate one and remember it.

On PROD_BACKUP_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{INTERM_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{INTERM_HOST_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;

```
#### Setup replication from PROD_BACKUPHOST to Intermediate
You will need the following info:
* PROD_BACKUP_HOST
* Replication user: repluser_intermediate
* Replication user password: 
* GTID from the /tmp/prod-backup/xtrabackup_binlog_info file (on Intermediate host) or from the terminal where you ran mariabackup on the PROD_BACKUPHOST
  (binlog.000013	379	87000-87000-478)

On INTERM_HOST:
```
CHANGE MASTER TO 
   MASTER_HOST="{PROD_BACKUP_HOST}", 
   MASTER_USER="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}",  
   MASTER_PASSWORD="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}", 
   MASTER_LOG_FILE='{CHANGE_ME}',
   MASTER_LOG_POS={CHANGE_ME};
START SLAVE;
```

### Step 1-6 : Create Backup of Intermediate from CC
**Optional**

### Step 1-7 : Upgrade Intermediate to Maria 10.6
On INTERM_HOST:
#### Stop slave
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
STOP SLAVE;
SHOW SLAVE STATUS;
```

#### Stop the MariaDB 10.4 node (INTERM_HOST) from ClusterControl
On INTERM_HOST:
```shell
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

#### Backup data, config and logs
On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
cd /var
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_log.tgz ./log/mysql
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_data.tgz ./lib/mysql
cd /etc
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_config.tgz ./my*
ls -al  /tmp/mysql_*
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql     9448 Mar 13 21:23 /tmp/mysql_config.tgz
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql 71948196 Mar 13 21:23 /tmp/mysql_data.tgz
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql   138363 Mar 13 21:22 /tmp/mysql_log.tgz
exit
```

#### Remove MariaDB 10.4 packages
On INTERM_HOST:

```
sudo dnf list installed MariaDB-*
MariaDB-backup.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-client.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-common.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-server.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-shared.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
```

```
sudo dnf list installed galera-4
galera-4.x86_64                                                        26.4.18-1.el8                                                        @mariadb-main
```

```
sudo yum remove -y MariaDB-server MariaDB-backup MariaDB-common MariaDB-shared MariaDB-client galera-4
```

#### Install MariaDB 10.6 packages
On INTERM_HOST:

Move to the directory where the following rpms are.
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm

sudo dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

##### Make Configuration File Changes
On INTERM_HOST:

```
cd /tmp
mkdir etc
cd etc
tar xvf ../mysql_config.tgz
sudo su -
cd /etc
mv my.cnf my.cnf.10-6.default
cp /tmp/etc/my.cnf .
exit
```

##### Start upgraded MariaDB 10.6 node (INTERM_HOST) from ClusterControl
**NOTE**: do not select any extra start options in the CC2 UI while starting node.
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

##### Run mariadb-upgrae with --skip-write-binlog
On INTERM_HOST:

```
sudo su - mysql
mariadb-upgrade -u root -p -v --skip-write-binlog
Enter password: 
Looking for 'mariadb' as: mariadb
Looking for 'mariadb-check' as: mariadb-check
Empty or non existent /var/lib/mysql/mysql_upgrade_info. Assuming mysql_upgrade has to be run!
Phase 1/8: Checking and upgrading mysql database
Processing databases
mysql
mysql.column_stats                                 OK
...
mysql.wsrep_cluster                                OK
mysql.wsrep_cluster_members                        OK
mysql.wsrep_streaming_log                          OK
Phase 2/8: Installing used storage engines... Skipped
...
Phase 3/8: Running 'mysql_fix_privilege_tables'
...
Phase 4/8: Fixing views
...
Phase 5/8: Fixing table and database names
Processing databases
...
Phase 6/8: Checking and upgrading tables
...
Phase 7/8: uninstalling plugins
...
Phase 8/8: Running 'FLUSH PRIVILEGES'
OK

exit
```

Restart MariaDB server
```
sudo systemctl restart mariadb
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

##### Update MariaDB (and Galera) version in ClusterControl (CC2 host)
On CC2_HOST:

Find the cluster ID (CID) of the cluster in ClusterControl. Update the config as shown below.

![img_1.png](img_1.png)

```
ssh {CC2_HOST}
sudo vi /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf
# find and replace the version
#mysql_version=10.4
mysql_version=10.6
#galera_version=3.x
galera_version=4.x
```
Restart ClusterControl (CMON)
```
sudo systemctl restart cmon
```

### Step 1-8 : Allow Intermediate to sync wit Prod (INTERM_HOST)
On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
SHOW SLAVE STATUS \G
```

### Step 1-9 : Take a backup of MariaDB 10.6 of Intermediate (manual)
On INTERM_HOST:
```
# NOTE: change the location of the backup and make sure mysql user has privs to write to the location.
# NOTE: you may also have to pass in "--user=value --password=value" options...
sudo su - mysql
mkdir -p {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}
ulimit -n 256000 && LC_ALL=C mariadb-backup --defaults-file=/etc/my.cnf \
    --backup --galera-info --slave-info --parallel=1 --stream=xbstream | \
    gzip -6 - > {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz  2>&1

# MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000024', position '395', GTID of the last change '80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509'

exit
sudo su -
mv {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
exit
sudo chown {SHELL_USER:SHELL_USER} /tmp/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz
```
NOTE: Please record the binlog file, position and GTID. It will be a line such as the following
```
[e.g] MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000024', position '395', GTID of the last change '80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509'
```

## Step 2 : Deploy new (single node) D1_C1 and D1_C2 Maria 10.6 galera clusters from CC2 that would be Slaves of Intermediate
### Step 2-1 : Deploy new (single node) D1_C1 and D1_C2 Maria 10.6 galera clusters from CC2
Deploy on hosts D1_C1_1 **and** D1_C2_1:
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm

sudo dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

#### Deploying through ClusterControl (CC2)
![img.png](img.png)

### Step 2-2 (A) : Restore Intermediate's backup on D1_C1_1 (manual)
#### Transfer Intermediate's backup to D1_C1_1
On D1_C1_1:
```
# Example
scp {SHELL_USER}@{INTERM_HOST}:/tmp/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
```
#### Stop MariaDB node of (D1_C1_1) from CC2
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```
#### Restore backup
Now you are ready start restore. Unzip and extract the backup first
```
# Example
cd /tmp
ls -al
-rw-r--r--. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 70504527 Mar 13 22:56 backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz

gunzip backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz 
mkdir prod-backup
cd prod-backup
mbstream -x < ../backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream
ls -l
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user    499712 Mar 13 23:04 aria_log.00000001
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        52 Mar 13 23:04 aria_log_control
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       286 Mar 13 23:04 backup-my.cnf
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       395 Mar 13 23:04 binlog.000024
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        46 Mar 13 23:04 donor_galera_info
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 employees
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        60 Mar 13 23:04 foo
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      2506 Mar 13 23:04 ib_buffer_pool
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 104857600 Mar 13 23:04 ibdata1
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user     10752 Mar 13 23:04 ib_logfile0
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        84 Mar 13 23:04 menagerie
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 mysql
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 nation
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        20 Mar 13 23:04 performance_schema
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 sakila
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      8192 Mar 13 23:04 sys
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user       144 Mar 13 23:04 world
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        49 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_binlog_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       105 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_checkpoints
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        46 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_galera_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       584 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        71 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_slave_info

cat xtrabackup_binlog_info 
# binlog.000024	395	80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509
```

##### Prepare the backup
```
sudo chown -R mysql:mysql /tmp/prod-backup
sudo su - mysql
mariabackup --prepare --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```

##### Move back the backup to datair of MariaDB
```
sudo su - mysql
mkdir /tmp/backup-before-restore-datadir
cd /var/lib
tar cvfz /tmp/backup-before-restore-datadir/mysql-datadir.tgz ./mysql
/bin/rm -rf ./mysql/*
ls -l ./mysql
mariabackup --move-back --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```

#### Start the D1_C1 node from CC2 (use bootstrap cluster option)
NOTE: do **NOT** select the "**initial start**" option

#### Grant privileges to CC2 to monitor the single node galera
You will need the following:
* CC2's hostname
* CC2's ipv4 address
* Password used by CC2 to monitor the D1_C1 node/cluster. This can be obtained from the CC2 host's /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf file (search for "mysql_password" attribute)


  ![img_1.png](img_1.png)

```
# make necessary changes below the controller_ip_address, the controller_hostname, and the password. Here controller is CC2
#sudo su - mysql
#mysql -u root -p
#CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
#CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
#GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
#GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
#FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
#exit
#exit
```

### Step 2-2 (B) : Restore Intermediate's backup on D1_C2_1 (manual)
Repeat Step (2-2) for host D1_C2_1

### Step 2-3 : Sync on D1_C1_1 and D1_C2_1 (manual) from Intermediate

#### Create and Grant privileges for the replication user on the Intermediate node
You will need the following:
* D1_C1's (and D1_C2's) hostname
* D1_C1's (and D1_C2's) ipv4 address
* A password to use for auth. Just generate one and remember it.

On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C1_1}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C1_1_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C2_1}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C2_1_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
exit
exit
```

#### Setup replication from INTERM_HOST to D1_C1_1 and D1_C2_1
You will need the following info:
* INTERM_HOST
* Replication user: repluser_intermediate
* Replication user password:
* GTID from the /tmp/prod-backup/xtrabackup_binlog_info file (on Intermediate host) or from the terminal where you ran mariabackup on the PROD_BACKUPHOST
  (binlog.000024	395	80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509)

On D1_C1_1 and D1_C2_1:
```
CHANGE MASTER TO 
   MASTER_HOST="INTERM_HOST", 
   MASTER_USER="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}",  
   MASTER_PASSWORD="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}", 
   MASTER_LOG_FILE='{CHANGE_ME}',
   MASTER_LOG_POS={CHANGE_ME};
START SLAVE;
```

Commit message:

Added optional space reclaim step

databases/mariadb/migration-n-upgrade/mariadb_galera_ugrade_fm_10_4_to_10_6.md, after:

# Upgrading MariaDB (Galera) from 10.4 to 10.6
Instructions on how to upgrade MariaDB Galera setup.

#### References

#### Highlevel Steps
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1GaqwR1rFb1jJN_7d7wJ30WPc0MV33um8F2naIWYwuug/edit

### NOTE: Replace anything in curly brackets with relevant values

## Step 0 : Deploy software
### Step 0-1 : Deploy CC2 (beyond the scope of this document)
### Step 0-2 : Deploy MariaDB galera software
Download MariaDB 10.6 packages from https://dlm.mariadb.com/browse/mariadb_server/10.6.21/yum/rhel/9Server/x86_64/rpms/

Download MariaDB 10.4 packages from https://dlm.mariadb.com/browse/mariadb_server/10.4.34/yum/rhel/8Server/x86_64/rpms/

#### MariaDB 10.6 and Galera 4
All the D?_C?_N hosts need to have the following packages on them

On D?_C?_N hosts and INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
```

#### MariaDB 10.4 and Galera 4
The INTERM_HOST needs to have the following additional packages on it

On INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_4_packages
ls -l 
galera-4-26.4.18-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.4.34-1.el8.x86_64.rpm
```

## Step 1 : Create Intermediate (MariaDB 10.4) Replica (single node galera)
### Step 1-1 : Create Intermediate (MariaDB 10.4) Replica through CC2
#### Install MariaDB and Galera packages (manual)
Install the database packages manually on the respective hosts:

On INTERM_HOST:
```
cd 10_4_packages
dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

#### Deploying through ClusterControl (CC2)
![img.png](img.png)


### Step 1-2 : Create Binary backup of Prod
Select one of the nodes in the Prod galera cluster and SSH to it.

On PROD_BACKUP_HOST:
```
ssh {PROD_BACKUP_HOST}

# NOTE: change the location of the backup and make sure mysql user has privs to write to the location.
# NOTE: you may also have to pass in "--user=value --password=value" options...
sudo su - mysql
mkdir -p {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}
ulimit -n 256000 && LC_ALL=C mariadb-backup --defaults-file=/etc/my.cnf \
    --backup --galera-info --slave-info --parallel=1 --stream=xbstream | \
    gzip -6 - > {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz  2>&1
exit
sudo su -
mv {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
exit
sudo chown {SHELL_USER:SHELL_USER} /tmp/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz
```
NOTE: Please record the binlog file, position and GTID. It will be a line such as the following
```
[e.g.] MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000013', position '379', GTID of the last change '87000-87000-478'
```

### Step 1-3 : Transfer Binary backup of Prod to Intermediate
On INTERM_HOST:
```
# Example
scp {SHELL_USER}@{PROD_BACKUP_HOST}:/tmp/backup-full-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
```

### Step 1-4 : Restore Binary backup of Prod on Intermediate
#### Stop the node (i.e., the single node galera cluster) from CC2
This will stop the MariaDB server on the single node galera. Verify that it is indeed stopped by:
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```
#### Restore backup
Now you are ready start restore. Unzip and extract the backup first

On INTERM_HOST:
```
# Example
cd /tmp
ls -al
-rw-rw-r--.  1 cloud-user cloud-user 70519388 Mar 13 18:51 backup-full-1.xbstream.gz

gunzip backup-full-1.xbstream.gz 
mkdir prod-backup
cd prod-backup
mbstream -x < ../backup-full-1.xbstream
ls -l
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user     49152 Mar 13 16:11 aria_log.00000001
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        52 Mar 13 16:11 aria_log_control
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       326 Mar 13 16:11 backup-my.cnf
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       379 Mar 13 16:11 binlog.000010
-rw-rw-r--. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       318 Mar 13 15:52 cmon_backup.log
-rw-------. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      3041 Mar 13 15:52 cmon_backup.metadata
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 employees
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       972 Mar 13 16:11 ib_buffer_pool
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      2560 Mar 13 16:11 ib_logfile0
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 104857600 Mar 13 16:11 ibdata1
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        84 Mar 13 16:11 menagerie
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 mysql
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 nation
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        20 Mar 13 16:11 performance_schema
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 16:11 sakila
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user       144 Mar 13 16:11 world
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        34 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_binlog_info
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       105 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_checkpoints
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        41 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_galera_info
-rw-rw----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       556 Mar 13 16:11 xtrabackup_info
```
##### Prepare the backup
```
sudo chown -R mysql:mysql /tmp/prod-backup
sudo su - mysql
mariabackup --prepare --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```
##### Move back the backup to datair of MariaDB
```
sudo su - mysql
cd /var/lib
/bin/rm -rf ./mysql/*

ls -l ./mysql
# should be empty

mariabackup --move-back --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```
#### Start the node from CC2 (use bootstrap cluster option)
NOTE: do **NOT** select the "**initial start**" option

#### Grant privileges to CC2 to monitor the single node galera 
You will need the following:
* CC2's hostname
* CC2's ipv4 address
* Password used by CC2 to monitor the single node cluster. This can be obtained from the CC2 host's /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf file (search for "mysql_password" attribute)
 

![img_1.png](img_1.png)

On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
exit
exit
```

### Step 1-5 : Setup Intermediate as Slave of Prod (and allow to sync)
#### Create and Grant privileges for the replication user on the Prod cluster
You will need the following:
* Intermediate's hostname
* Intermediate's ipv4 address
* A password to use for auth. Just generate one and remember it.

On PROD_BACKUP_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{INTERM_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{INTERM_HOST_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;

```
#### Setup replication from PROD_BACKUPHOST to Intermediate
You will need the following info:
* PROD_BACKUP_HOST
* Replication user: repluser_intermediate
* Replication user password: 
* GTID from the /tmp/prod-backup/xtrabackup_binlog_info file (on Intermediate host) or from the terminal where you ran mariabackup on the PROD_BACKUPHOST
  (binlog.000013	379	87000-87000-478)

On INTERM_HOST:
```
CHANGE MASTER TO 
   MASTER_HOST="{PROD_BACKUP_HOST}", 
   MASTER_USER="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}",  
   MASTER_PASSWORD="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}", 
   MASTER_LOG_FILE='{CHANGE_ME}',
   MASTER_LOG_POS={CHANGE_ME};
START SLAVE;
```

### Step 1-6 : Create Backup of Intermediate from CC
**Optional**

### Step 1-7 : Upgrade Intermediate to Maria 10.6
On INTERM_HOST:
#### Stop slave
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
STOP SLAVE;
SHOW SLAVE STATUS;
```

#### Stop the MariaDB 10.4 node (INTERM_HOST) from ClusterControl
On INTERM_HOST:
```shell
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

#### Backup data, config and logs
On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
cd /var
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_log.tgz ./log/mysql
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_data.tgz ./lib/mysql
cd /etc
tar cvfz /tmp/mysql_config.tgz ./my*
ls -al  /tmp/mysql_*
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql     9448 Mar 13 21:23 /tmp/mysql_config.tgz
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql 71948196 Mar 13 21:23 /tmp/mysql_data.tgz
-rw-rw-r--. 1 mysql mysql   138363 Mar 13 21:22 /tmp/mysql_log.tgz
exit
```

#### Remove MariaDB 10.4 packages
On INTERM_HOST:

```
sudo dnf list installed MariaDB-*
MariaDB-backup.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-client.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-common.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-server.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
MariaDB-shared.x86_64                                                     10.4.34-1.el8                                                     @mariadb-main
```

```
sudo dnf list installed galera-4
galera-4.x86_64                                                        26.4.18-1.el8                                                        @mariadb-main
```

```
sudo yum remove -y MariaDB-server MariaDB-backup MariaDB-common MariaDB-shared MariaDB-client galera-4
```

#### Install MariaDB 10.6 packages
On INTERM_HOST:

Move to the directory where the following rpms are.
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm

sudo dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

##### Make Configuration File Changes
On INTERM_HOST:

```
cd /tmp
mkdir etc
cd etc
tar xvf ../mysql_config.tgz
sudo su -
cd /etc
mv my.cnf my.cnf.10-6.default
cp /tmp/etc/my.cnf .
exit
```

##### Start upgraded MariaDB 10.6 node (INTERM_HOST) from ClusterControl
**NOTE**: do not select any extra start options in the CC2 UI while starting node.
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

##### Run mariadb-upgrae with --skip-write-binlog
On INTERM_HOST:

```
sudo su - mysql
mariadb-upgrade -u root -p -v --skip-write-binlog
Enter password: 
Looking for 'mariadb' as: mariadb
Looking for 'mariadb-check' as: mariadb-check
Empty or non existent /var/lib/mysql/mysql_upgrade_info. Assuming mysql_upgrade has to be run!
Phase 1/8: Checking and upgrading mysql database
Processing databases
mysql
mysql.column_stats                                 OK
...
mysql.wsrep_cluster                                OK
mysql.wsrep_cluster_members                        OK
mysql.wsrep_streaming_log                          OK
Phase 2/8: Installing used storage engines... Skipped
...
Phase 3/8: Running 'mysql_fix_privilege_tables'
...
Phase 4/8: Fixing views
...
Phase 5/8: Fixing table and database names
Processing databases
...
Phase 6/8: Checking and upgrading tables
...
Phase 7/8: uninstalling plugins
...
Phase 8/8: Running 'FLUSH PRIVILEGES'
OK

exit
```

Restart MariaDB server
```
sudo systemctl restart mariadb
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```

##### Update MariaDB (and Galera) version in ClusterControl (CC2 host)
On CC2_HOST:

Find the cluster ID (CID) of the cluster in ClusterControl. Update the config as shown below.

![img_1.png](img_1.png)

```
ssh {CC2_HOST}
sudo vi /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf
# find and replace the version
#mysql_version=10.4
mysql_version=10.6
#galera_version=3.x
galera_version=4.x
```
Restart ClusterControl (CMON)
```
sudo systemctl restart cmon
```

### Step 1-8 : Allow Intermediate to sync wit Prod (INTERM_HOST)
On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
SHOW SLAVE STATUS \G
```

### Step 1-9 : Take a backup of MariaDB 10.6 of Intermediate (manual)
On INTERM_HOST:
```
# NOTE: change the location of the backup and make sure mysql user has privs to write to the location.
# NOTE: you may also have to pass in "--user=value --password=value" options...
sudo su - mysql
mkdir -p {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}
ulimit -n 256000 && LC_ALL=C mariadb-backup --defaults-file=/etc/my.cnf \
    --backup --galera-info --slave-info --parallel=1 --stream=xbstream | \
    gzip -6 - > {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz  2>&1

# MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000024', position '395', GTID of the last change '80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509'

exit
sudo su -
mv {PROD_BACKUP_LOC}/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
exit
sudo chown {SHELL_USER:SHELL_USER} /tmp/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz
```
NOTE: Please record the binlog file, position and GTID. It will be a line such as the following
```
[e.g] MySQL binlog position: filename 'binlog.000024', position '395', GTID of the last change '80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509'
```

## Step 2 : Deploy new (single node) D1_C1 and D1_C2 Maria 10.6 galera clusters from CC2 that would be Slaves of Intermediate
### Step 2-1 : Deploy new (single node) D1_C1 and D1_C2 Maria 10.6 galera clusters from CC2
Deploy on hosts D1_C1_1 **and** D1_C2_1:
```
cd 10_6_packages
ls -l
galera-4-26.4.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-backup-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-client-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-server-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-shared-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm
MariaDB-common-10.6.21-1.el9.x86_64.rpm

sudo dnf localinstall *.rpm
```

#### Deploying through ClusterControl (CC2)
![img.png](img.png)

### Step 2-2a (I) : Restore Intermediate's backup on D1_C1_1 (manual)
#### Transfer Intermediate's backup to D1_C1_1
On D1_C1_1:
```
# Example
scp {SHELL_USER}@{INTERM_HOST}:/tmp/backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz /tmp
```
#### Stop MariaDB node of (D1_C1_1) from CC2
```
sudo systemctl status mariadb
```
#### Restore backup
Now you are ready start restore. Unzip and extract the backup first
```
# Example
cd /tmp
ls -al
-rw-r--r--. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 70504527 Mar 13 22:56 backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz

gunzip backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream.gz 
mkdir prod-backup
cd prod-backup
mbstream -x < ../backup-intermediate-10_6-1.xbstream
ls -l
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user    499712 Mar 13 23:04 aria_log.00000001
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        52 Mar 13 23:04 aria_log_control
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       286 Mar 13 23:04 backup-my.cnf
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       395 Mar 13 23:04 binlog.000024
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        46 Mar 13 23:04 donor_galera_info
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 employees
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        60 Mar 13 23:04 foo
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user      2506 Mar 13 23:04 ib_buffer_pool
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user 104857600 Mar 13 23:04 ibdata1
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user     10752 Mar 13 23:04 ib_logfile0
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        84 Mar 13 23:04 menagerie
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 mysql
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 nation
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user        20 Mar 13 23:04 performance_schema
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      4096 Mar 13 23:04 sakila
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user      8192 Mar 13 23:04 sys
drwx------. 2 cloud-user cloud-user       144 Mar 13 23:04 world
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        49 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_binlog_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       105 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_checkpoints
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        46 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_galera_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user       584 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_info
-rw-r-----. 1 cloud-user cloud-user        71 Mar 13 23:04 xtrabackup_slave_info

cat xtrabackup_binlog_info 
# binlog.000024	395	80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509
```

##### Prepare the backup
```
sudo chown -R mysql:mysql /tmp/prod-backup
sudo su - mysql
mariabackup --prepare --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```

##### Move back the backup to datair of MariaDB
```
sudo su - mysql
mkdir /tmp/backup-before-restore-datadir
cd /var/lib
tar cvfz /tmp/backup-before-restore-datadir/mysql-datadir.tgz ./mysql
/bin/rm -rf ./mysql/*
ls -l ./mysql
mariabackup --move-back --target-dir=/tmp/prod-backup/
exit
```

#### Start the D1_C1 node from CC2 (use bootstrap cluster option)
NOTE: do **NOT** select the "**initial start**" option

#### Grant privileges to CC2 to monitor the single node galera
You will need the following:
* CC2's hostname
* CC2's ipv4 address
* Password used by CC2 to monitor the D1_C1 node/cluster. This can be obtained from the CC2 host's /etc/cmon.d/cmon_CID.cnf file (search for "mysql_password" attribute)


  ![img_1.png](img_1.png)

**NOTE**: If the cluster is showing up in ORANGE in CC2, it is most likely due to the fact that CC2 cannot access the DB to manage it. Therefore, you may have to grant it some privileges as shown below.
```
# make necessary changes below the controller_ip_address, the controller_hostname, and the password. Here controller is CC2
#sudo su - mysql
#mysql -u root -p
#CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
#CREATE USER 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}';
#GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_HOST}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
#GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'cmon'@'{CC2_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{INTERM_CMON_PW}' WITH GRANT OPTION;
#FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
#exit
#exit
```

### Step 2-2a (II) : Restore Intermediate's backup on D1_C2_1 (manual)
Repeat Step (2-2a) (I) for host D1_C2_1

### Step 2-2b (I) : (OPTIONAL) Reclaim space on D1_C1_1 (from CC2)
On D1_C1_1:

* Backup data using `mysqldump` from CC2
![cc2-backup-1.png](../../../cc/install/images/cc2-backup-1.png)
Optionally you can choose partial backup. But, we do **NOT** recommend selecting `partial backup` (i.e., don't select partial backup)
![cc2-backup-2.png](../../../cc/install/images/cc2-backup-2.png)
* Restore the backup from CC2...
![cc-restore-1.png](../../../cc/install/images/cc-restore-1.png)
And...
![cc2-restore-2.png](../../../cc/install/images/cc2-restore-2.png)

### Step 2-2b (II) : (OPTIONAL) Reclaim space on D1_C2_1
Repeat Step 2-2b (I) for D1_C2_1

### Step 2-3 : Sync on D1_C1_1 and D1_C2_1 (manual) from Intermediate

#### Create and Grant privileges for the replication user on the Intermediate node
You will need the following:
* D1_C1's (and D1_C2's) hostname
* D1_C1's (and D1_C2's) ipv4 address
* A password to use for auth. Just generate one and remember it.

On INTERM_HOST:
```
sudo su - mysql
mysql -u root -p
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C1_1}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C1_1_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C2_1}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
GRANT REPLICATION SLAVE ON *.* TO '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}'@'{D1_C2_1_IP}' IDENTIFIED BY '{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
exit
exit
```

#### Setup replication from INTERM_HOST to D1_C1_1 and D1_C2_1
You will need the following info:
* INTERM_HOST
* Replication user: repluser_intermediate
* Replication user password:
* GTID from the /tmp/prod-backup/xtrabackup_binlog_info file (on Intermediate host) or from the terminal where you ran mariabackup on the PROD_BACKUPHOST
  (binlog.000024	395	80000-80000-26,87000-87000-509)

On D1_C1_1 **and** D1_C2_1:
```
CHANGE MASTER TO 
   MASTER_HOST="INTERM_HOST", 
   MASTER_USER="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER}",  
   MASTER_PASSWORD="{MIGRATION_REPL_USER_PW}", 
   MASTER_LOG_FILE='{CHANGE_ME}',
   MASTER_LOG_POS={CHANGE_ME};
START SLAVE;
```
